# Getting started

This file can be used as a step-by-step guide to get the library running and to run certain examples. Use in addition the README.md of the MCMCSimulationLib and of the other used repositories for additional information to the different steps.

## Setting up the virtual environment for Python

### Virtual environment

Use some kind of virtual environment, for example miniconda3 (https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) to be able to generate a virtual environment. Useful commands can be found here: https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html

Set up an environment and install the following packages:

- matplotlib
- numpy
- pandas (version >= 1.1)
- scipy
- (pytorch)
- (jupyter lab)

The MCMCSimulationLib makes use of two additional libraries. You can follow the instructions here or the ones given on the respective github pages.

### pystatplottools

Clone pystatplottools from https://github.com/statphysandml/pystatplottools

```bash
git clone https://github.com/statphysandml/pystatplottools.git
```

Activate your virtual environment and install pystatplottools

```bash
source activate <virtualenv>

cd pystatplottools/
python setup.py sdist
pip install -e .
```

Optional:
- To test the library and to see what it can do, run the notebook cheat_sheet.ipynb in the examples/ directory of pystatplottools

```bash
cd examples/
jupyter lab
```

- You can also take a look at the other examples to get more insights into the different modules

### MCMCEvaluationLib

Clone MCMCEvaluationLib from https://github.com/statphysandml/MCMCEvaluationLib

```bash
git clone https://github.com/statphysandml/MCMCEvaluationLib.git
```

Install MCMCEvaluationlib in your virtual environment

```bash
cd MCMCEvaluationLib/
python setup.py sdist
pip install -e .
```

## Building the MCMCSimulationLib

Clone MCMCSimulationLib from https://github.com/statphysandml/MCMCSimulationLib

```bash
git clone https://github.com/statphysandml/MCMCSimulationLib.git
```

Build the library

```
source activate <virtualenv>
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ..
cmake --build .
```

To keep track of changes in the submodules when pulling updates of the respository, we strongly recommend to use

```bash
git pull --recurse-submodules
```

otherwise the code might not run properly after an update of the library.

## Examples

Build an example by navigating to the top-folder of on the examples in the examples/ directory

```bash
cd ../examples/IsingModel
```

Build the executable of the Ising model by running:

```
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ..
cmake --build .
```

The SaveAndLoad example demonstrate how to save and load simulation parameters and the SimulateAndExecute examples contains code for a minimal example that shows all existing different ways to run an actual simulation. More details on this can be found in the main.cpp file. The code in SimulateAndExecute is the same that is generated if a new project is built and can be used as a template for an own custom implementation.

Run the Ising model simulation (remember to have your virtual environment activated)

```bash
./IsingModel
```

What happend?

The Ising model has been simulated for different values of the inverse temperature. First, simulations for the determination of the correlation time are running. The simulation results are evaluated and the correlation time is computed. The used parameter sets can be found in the configs/ directory and in the data/ directory next to the sampled values. The results/ directory contains generated figures that show the correlation time and the correlation_time_results.json file contains the different determined correlation times. After that, the actual MCMC simulation runs, again for the different inverse temperatures. The correlation times are loaded beforehand from the results/ directory. The resulting sampled values are again evaluated in Python and stored in the expectation_value_results.json file in the results/ directory.

The jupyter notebook ising_model_cheat_sheet.ipynb in the examples/IsingModel/jupyter_notebooks/ directory shows a possible evaluation of the simulation results. It also demonstrates how the sampled configurations can be loaded into pytorch and visualized.

The examples/IsingModel/python_scripts/examples/ directory contains further code for examples that focus, in particular, on different ways to load the data into pytorch. There are also examples that demonstrate how the correlation times and the expectatoin values can be computed again directly in python (note that the same code is executed also by C++ if Python is supported).

The other examples in the simulations directory can be run the same manner.

## Build your own project

A template project can be generated by running

```python
python generate_application.py [-h] [-o OUTPUT_DIR] [--config-file CONFIG_FILE] [-n PROJECT_NAME]
```

in the top-folder of the MCMCSimulationLib. You are now ready to implement your own model =).

To see how a larger project can be built on top of the MCMCSimulationLib, you can take a look at the implementation of the LatticeModelSimulationLib (https://github.com/statphysandml/LatticeModelSimulationLib).

## Execution modes

In addition to the above, you might also be interested in the implementation of new execution modes. The execution modes are managed in the include/execution/ directory. Each of these modes can be identified with a particular type of simulation that is commonly performed in MCMC simulation. These are, for example, the computation of the autocorrelation time or the computation of expectation values. The interaction with the Python modules for an easier evaluation, i.e., the explicit call to certain functions, can be found in the executer.hpp file. Feel free to add new useful execution modes.

The executer takes also care of different ways to execute the code and contains the code that generates the qsub files for a submission to the cluster. You might need to adapt certain parameters or lines of code, here.

## The LatticeModelSimulationLib

Short instruction for using the LatticeModelSimulationLib are provided. Make sure to have successfully set up a virtual environment and to have installed the pystatplottools and the MCMCEvaluationLib. Instructions are given at the beginning of this file. It is not necessary to build the MCMCSimulationLib since this is done as part of the LatticeModelSimulationLib (The MCMCSimulationLib is integrated by a git submodule.).

Clone LatticeModelSimulationLib from https://github.com/statphysandml/LatticeModelSimulationLib

```bash
git clone https://github.com/statphysandml/LatticeModelSimulationLib.git
```

Follow the instructions on https://github.com/statphysandml/LatticeModelSimulationLib to build the library and to generate your first own project (works very similar to the respective steps to build the MCMCSimulationLib).

In contrast to the MCMCSimulationLib, the template project of this library implements the O(n) Model. Instructions for different ways to execute the code are provided in the main.cpp file. After running the simulation, one can evaluate the simulation data with the help of the jupyter notebook in the jupyter_notebooks/ directory of the template project.

More examples, including the simulation of several models with different kinds of update rules are provided in the LatticeModelImplementations project (https://github.com/statphysandml/LatticeModelImplementations) which is also integrated as a submodule in the examples/ directory. Again, the building process is quite similar to the one of the MCMCSimulationLib and the LatticeModelSimulationLib.

To keep track of changes in the submodules it is again strongly recommended to also update the submodules when git pull is called,

```bash
git pull --recurse-submodules
```

## Advanced

### Custom measures

It is very likely that one wants to compute measures on the configurations which are not implemeted already. There is the possiblity to add code to do this either in Python or C++.

In C++, it is done by overloading the generate_measures function of SystemBase class or the perform_measurements and get_measure_names functions.

In Python, one can generate a custom_measures.py file that implements a compute_measures function. For an example, see the Ising model implementation, i.e., the files in the examples/IsingModel/python_scripts/ directory. The path to this scripts needs to be set in C++. This can be done with the help of `PYTHON_SCRIPTS_PATH` CMake variable.

Custom measures for the pytorch dataset: For the generation of a pytorch dataset there exists a third possiblity to compute custom measures from the configurations. An example is given in the O(n) Model simulation of the LatticeModelImplementations project. The template project of the LatticeModelSimulationLib contains also an example where a measure is computed during the generation of a pytorch dataset.

### ... More topics will follow ...